Hey, it's Rachel.
Before we start, I have a quick request
for our listeners.
Do any of you have kids who were really
excited by the Artemis space launch
earlier this month? Because if so, we
are wondering what questions they have
for the astronauts now that they are
back on Earth.
You can have your child leave us a
voicemail with their one big question
for the astronauts at 212-556-4000.
Again, 212-556-4000.
Make sure they say their name, their
age, and where they're from. And we
might use their question on a future
episode of The Daily.
And lastly, if there are any kids
listening to this, that's really cool.
You could definitely call us yourselves,
but make sure to ask your parents first.
Okay, thanks so much. Here's today's
show.
From The New York [music] Times, I'm
Rachel Abrams, and this is The Daily.
>> [music]
>> For years, music fans have said they
felt ripped off by Ticketmaster and its
parent [music] company, Live Nation.
And last week, a jury ruled that they
were right, and that the company is, in
fact, a monopoly.
>> [music]
>> And so today, music reporter Ben Sisario
breaks down the dramatic trial that
unfolded, what it may mean for
concertgoers,
and why the federal government's
handling of the [music] case is now
under scrutiny.
It's Thursday, [music] April 23rd.
Ben, welcome back to The Daily.
Thank you. You were in the courtroom
for, I think, 6 weeks following the
trial of probably one of the most
reviled companies in this country, which
is Live Nation. The case, of course,
ended last week with the jury's verdict.
So, just to start us off, how big of a
deal is this?
It's a huge deal in the music industry.
Live Nation and Ticketmaster were found
to be a monopoly in a resounding
verdict. And Live Nation is a colossus
in music. They're a giant company. They
put on tens of thousands of concerts all
over the world every year. They sell
something like 600 million tickets every
year on Ticketmaster. They own hundreds
of venues. They have deals with dozens
of artists for their tours. If you saw
Beyoncé, Coldplay, The Weeknd, Kendrick
Lamar, Metallica, those are Live Nation
tours. If you saw a tour by an artist
working with Live Nation, you may have
seen it in a Live Nation venue. You may
have bought the ticket from
Ticketmaster. While you were at the
venue, you bought a hot dog and beer.
Live Nation may well have gotten some of
that money. They sort of touch almost
every
aspect of live entertainment. And this
was a pretty dramatic trial, at least
when it came to an antitrust case, which
is a lot of minutia about economics and
markets usually. But this case had a lot
of twists and turns, and even the fact
that it came to a verdict was a bit of a
surprise, since for a moment there it
looked like Live Nation was going to be
able to settle the case. But in fact, it
made its way to the jury, and there was
this verdict that they were liable of
being a monopoly. You know, when we talk
about monopolies, the first kind of
companies that come to mind might be
tech giants or every other kind of
company besides a concert company,
right? So, I sort of wonder why concerts
and Live Nation got on the government's
radar specifically. Well, yeah, I think
these days we might think of Google and
other big tech companies as being
the biggest monopolies that we come
across. But this whole question of
antitrust and monopolies goes way back
in history. And, you know, in some ways
Live Nation is like the Standard Oil
of concerts and live entertainment. And
so, in that way, it's it's not a
surprise. I mean, since Live Nation and
Ticketmaster merged 16 years ago,
there's been eyes on this, both in the
music business, but also in kind of
policy circles about was this company
too big and too powerful
for a basic consumer good. I also think
that Taylor Swift was critical in making
this a sort of popular issue among
everyday Americans and also people in
Washington. Taylor Swift, I've heard of
her.
What happened in that situation?
So, Taylor had her Eras Tour, and she
put tickets on sale back in 2022. Now,
Taylor is actually not a Live Nation
artist, but it's a good example of just
how integrated Live Nation is with
everything in the music industry, that
even an artist that wasn't working with
them still inevitably has to work with
them. Because she was playing all of
these venues that Live Nation controlled
and where Ticketmaster sold the tickets,
she had to go through Ticketmaster.
The Eras Tour has become the errors
tour. I've spent my whole day, from
10:00 a.m. until this point, trying to
get tickets to see Taylor Swift. And it
was a catastrophe. After a presale rush
forced many to wait for hours, only to
encounter error messages that sent them
to the back of the
>> There were huge lines, it crashed. It
was a big hubbub of people couldn't get
their concert tickets to Taylor Swift.
And I think it opened a lot of people's
eyes to say, "What's going on here? Why
can I buy something on Amazon or any
other internet site, but it's such a
problem when it comes to Ticketmaster?"
I remember people being furious. Yes.
And it caught the attention of
Washington. There was a Senate Judiciary
hearing where senators from both parties
were really beating up on Live Nation
and Ticketmaster and asking them very
tough questions and were very
unsatisfied with the answers that they
were given. And senators from both
parties called them a monopoly. We know
now that the investigation by the
Justice Department was already in
motion.
So, it it wasn't begun by Taylor, but
that really focused a lot of attention
on this all around the country. And so,
a couple years later, the Justice
Department brings their case.
That all makes sense. You had also said
earlier that there were a lot of twists
and turns to the case.
I'd like to understand how
[clears throat] this case started off
and how exactly we ended up with this
ultimate ruling. The government brought
the case in 2024.
And they were joined by 40 state
attorney generals, which is pretty rare
to have that buy-in across blue states
and red states. It was a very popular
issue all across the country. And the
the case that the government was making
was that because of its scale, because
Live Nation is so big, and that it's
this many-tentacled
beast, it controls the music industry.
It's a monopoly in concert promotion,
it's a monopoly in ticketing, it's
stymied competition, it's driven up
ticket prices for everybody.
And
that was the case that the government
made and brought to trial.
So, the trial opens, and one of the big
claims that the government is making is
that Live Nation threatens venues to use
Ticketmaster. And the way they do this
is through part of their monopoly, that
they have one side of their business
that's selling tickets and one side of
their business that's putting on
concerts, and that they go to venues and
say, "You better use Ticketmaster, or
else you're not going to get our
concerts." And if a venue loses access
to those concerts, it would be
devastating for them
economically, right? So, right off the
bat, they make that argument, and
there's this really striking testimony
about the Barclays Center in Brooklyn.
The very first witness in the case is
the former head of the Barclays Center.
And in 2021,
the Barclays Center had been open for
almost 10 years and had been a
Ticketmaster client. Then they decide
they want to switch to a different
ticketing company called SeatGeek. The
jury hears a recording of a phone call
where the head of the Barclays Center is
on the phone with the CEO of Live
Nation, Michael Rapino, one of the most
powerful people in music.
And
Barclays tells him,
"We're not using Ticketmaster anymore.
We're going with this other company."
And Rapino's reaction is angry. He's
dropping profanities.
He's very upset. You hear the anger in
his voice. Because he's feeling what?
What is his interpretation of what
they're saying to him? Well, he doesn't
want to lose the account. It's a it's a
prominent venue, right? And they work
hard to keep their ticketing deals. So,
he's very upset that they're losing
Barclays. And he says to him, "It's
going to be a tough time to deliver
tickets or concerts."
And the head of the Barclays Center
testifies that he took that as a threat,
saying that if you don't renew your
Ticketmaster deal, you're not going to
get our concerts. Right. And he actually
follows up and says, "After that point,
we tracked what we were getting, and we
lost Live Nation concerts." And one of
the ones that stood out to him was
Billie Eilish. And what happened with
Billie Eilish specifically?
So, Billie Eilish was one of the artists
who was on tour right when COVID
happened. On that tour, Billie was
supposed to have played Madison Square
Garden and Barclays. But the tour was
canceled because of COVID. When she
comes back on tour 2 years later, she
goes back to Madison Square Garden, but
instead of going to Barclays, she goes
to the new UBS Arena on Long Island.
And the guy who was running Barclays
said, "To me, that was a smoking gun."
That's the word he used. Usually, if an
artist has to cancel a show, they they
make their best efforts to come back for
their fans. And he said, "We asked Live
Nation, why didn't she come back to our
venue?" And the answer was, "It was the
artist's decision to go to the other
place." Mhm. But he didn't believe that.
Well, he testified that they reached out
to Billie Eilish's manager who told
them, "No, it was Live Nation's decision
to do this." It sounds like the Barclays
CEO heard this and he connected it to
that phone call he had had with Rapino
that he had interpreted as a threat
earlier. And that this was making good
on that threat, that it was retaliation.
And that was one of the big arguments
that the government was making, that
this company does make threats and they
even follow through with them and
retaliate if they don't get what they
want. And that is classic
anti-competitive behavior. Right,
because they have the size to make these
threats, make good on them. Were there
other threats that stood out to you from
the trial?
Well, there was one that I wrote about
in a separate story about Irvine,
California. Irvine had a really popular
amphitheater that closed and the city
wanted to build a new one. And so, they
got into business with Live Nation and
they were working out a deal and the
city said,
"We want to have what's called an open
venue," which means any company who
wants to put on a show, call us, make a
deal, you can put on your show. Live
Nation was very upset about that.
Because they wanted to control the
bookings. And the person who testified
was not some experienced music industry
person. This was a city official who
said, "They told us that if you don't do
it our way, we're going to send concerts
around you. This venue will fail." Mhm.
So, that kind of testimony, I think,
made a very strong impression on the
jury right off the bat. It seemed to be
going well for the government. They came
out with some really powerful testimony
that I think buttressed the case that
they were making. Now, this is the
plaintiffs making their case. We hadn't
heard Live Nation's side of the story
yet. Okay, so on the face of things,
those seem like compelling examples what
you just described. What is Live Nation
arguing in its defense here? Well, Live
Nation argues, of course, that they are
not a monopoly. They say that they they
don't threaten venues and that the
pricing of all of this, why are concerts
expensive, that that's the market at
work. That people pay a lot of money for
big concerts by famous artists because
they want to see them and because the
artists know that they can charge what
the market will bear. And
behind all of this is also the secondary
market of ticketing. That for a long
time now, the music industry has been
able to look at StubHub and all these
other secondary market sites and see
that somebody who sold their ticket for
200 bucks,
now it's being sold for a thousand. Mhm.
So, [clears throat] that's part of their
general argument that it's not monopoly,
it's the market doing its thing. Right,
they're arguing basically this is supply
and demand, which sounds pretty
reasonable, at least on the surface,
right? It does. But as all this is
happening in the courtroom, there's sort
of a secondary thing playing out in
private where Live Nation is essentially
lobbying the Justice Department to
settle this case. And that's something
that they had been working on for quite
a while. They hired some people who are
very close to the Trump administration
to advocate for them in Washington. It's
a guy named Rick Grenell who Trump
appointed to run the Kennedy Center and
then Live Nation put on their board of
directors. Mhm. Live Nation also hired
Kellyanne Conway who had worked in the
first Trump administration to talk to
people high up at the Justice
Department. And so, all of that is going
on mostly hidden from view.
To me, those actions that you described,
hiring Trump allies essentially,
that indicates a company that's sort of
nervous and trying to hedge its bets. Is
that the right way to read it?
Well, I think Live Nation certainly
looked at this as a as an existential
threat to them, right? Like the the
government wanted their company to be
broken up and so, they were doing
everything they could to protect that.
They were developing their case in
court, but they were also trying to
settle it. And that's basically what
happens. Just a week into the trial when
the government seems to be holding a lot
of leverage,
it's revealed that the Justice
Department did settle with Live Nation.
And there was a lot of drama in the
courtroom when this happened because it
seemed to take everyone by surprise.
Even the Justice Department's litigators
in the courtroom said they didn't know
about this. Mhm. And the judge was very
angry. He scolded both Live Nation and
the Justice Department and that made for
quite a moment in the courtroom.
Do we have any idea why the government
settled at that moment? We do not. And
there's still a lot of questions about
exactly how this settlement came
together. But for Live Nation, it was a
pretty good deal. I mean, first of all,
they avoided getting split up. Right,
that was their biggest concern going
into this. They didn't want the concert
part of Live Nation to be separated from
Ticketmaster. They did offer some
concessions in their settlement. They
said that they were going to loosen up
the rules that they had about ticketing
to allow other ticket sellers to work in
some of their venues and also that they
would make it easier for artists who
were not working with them to put on
shows in their venues.
And there was also a pool of money
of about 280 million dollars that they
were going to offer to any of the states
that signed on. Now, this is a company
that has revenues of about 25 billion.
Mhm. So, 280 million dollars, I think
that caught people's eye right off the
bat as, "Gee, that that seems like a
fairly low amount of money especially
when the government at that point in the
case was kind of holding a lot of
leverage."
>> [music]
>> For Live Nation, it potentially meant
the end of the case, that they were able
to avoid getting broken up and [music]
that the trial might now be over.
But that is not what ended up happening.
We'll be right back.
Okay, so Ben, how did this trial go from
looking like Live Nation had largely
escaped unscathed to them losing so
completely by being declared this
monopoly? Well, after the settlement is
announced, the state attorneys general,
these 40 states, most of them object to
the settlement and they feel that it's
totally unsatisfactory.
And they decide to push forward.
Ultimately, only six out of the 40
states take that settlement deal and
since it was just part of them, they
only got 18 million dollars. That was
the amount that Live Nation paid
ultimately to those settling states. So,
the AGs in this moment basically have a
choice whether to take the settlement
that the federal government has reached
or to continue pursuing litigation on
their own without the help of the
federal government? That's exactly
right. So, the federal government was
going to exit the case and the Justice
Department had led the case. Their
lawyers were the ones interviewing the
witnesses, giving the opening
statements, really running it. And the
states knew that they were at a severe
disadvantage and they actually wanted to
be able to have more time to continue,
but the judge said, "If you're not
settling now, you have to continue the
case with our jury."
So, the next Monday, they come back with
a new lawyer.
The states hired a well-known antitrust
lawyer who had only about a week to
prepare for leading this case, but he
did it. Mhm.
>> And they continued [clears throat]
bringing the case even though they would
have seemed at that point to be at a
disadvantage. How optimistic are the AGs
feeling at this moment in time with
their new lawyer who's getting this
[clears throat] crash course? The
government, as you said, has just
dropped out. Those were the guys who had
been working the hardest for the
longest, right? That's exactly right. I
think that they felt that the case
itself was strong. That there was a
great deal of evidence that supported
the accusation that this company was a
monopoly, but they knew that it was
going to be tricky for them to continue
this case and said they're worried that
this might look strange to the jury,
that the jury would be confused. Why did
the federal government leave? Where did
they go? What's happening?
>> Mhm. But they plowed through. And the
first few days, you saw a few hiccups.
They were stumbling a little bit, but
one of their strategies was emphasize
the bullying behavior and emphasize the
impact on the consumer. And did they
give other examples of that behavior?
Like what were sort of their strongest
selling points in this moment? Well,
there were the ones about the venues
when it came to ticketing, but there
were also a lot of examples of things
from emails where Live Nation was
talking about, "How do we sort of keep
other promoters out of our venues?"
There was talk about how they would
rather have their venues go dark than
allow other people to put on a show.
They were renewing leases for
underperforming venues to prevent them
from getting into the hands of their
competitors. One of the most shocking
pieces of evidence, to be honest, was
some Slack messages from two relatively
junior employees at Live Nation. There
was one who worked in Florida, one in
Virginia.
And it's these two guys exchanging
private Slack messages bragging about
how they're overcharging people for
things like parking, for VIP ticket
upgrades. They say we're gouging people.
They call fans so stupid. They use that
explicit language. They use that
explicit language. And in the most
amazing one, one of them said, "We're
robbing them blind, baby." Wow, okay.
Seems pretty clear. Yeah, if you ever
have that thought, if you work at a
company, do not put that in a Slack.
That's exactly what they did. [laughter]
And it was a terrible embarrassment for
Live Nation. And actually one of these
guys was on the stand.
He'd been promoted. He's now actually at
a senior position at Live Nation. He
apologized profusely and I'm sure he was
encouraged to say this, but he pointed
out he was not following company policy
by doing those things.
>> [clears throat]
>> But you have to imagine that people on
the jury are listening to this and some
of them go to concerts and presumably
this confirms all of ticket buyers'
worst fears, these Slacks.
I think they were totally persuasive to
the jury because when they came back
with their verdict, it was a very
complicated form that they had to go
through and answer questions. All
together was around 100 questions and
they got really into the weeds about the
market definitions and was it shown that
there was a anti-competitive effect on
the marketplace and all that kind of
stuff and they answered yes, yes, yes,
yes, yes every question that was
presented to them. They answered yes.
So, there's absolutely no wiggle room or
inconsistency in it. The jury was
completely persuaded by the government's
case and it was a real victory for the
states that continued this. Okay, so
that's the verdict. Live Nation
Ticketmaster, they're found pretty
convincingly, it sounds like, to be a
monopoly which as you said at the
beginning of the conversation, that's a
very big deal. But I think the question
for everybody listening, Ben, is how
[clears throat] does the verdict affect
the concert-going public? Like, what can
we tell people about how their concert
or ticket experience might change going
forward? Well, first of all, this case
is not over. There's going to be a whole
separate trial that will happen probably
in a few months where the judge will
determine what to call the remedies for
this. That's how is Live Nation going to
be punished.
Breaking up the company still is on the
table. That is one option available to
the judge. There will also be monetary
damages that will go to the states.
That will be a heavily contested thing
between the government and Live Nation.
There may be appeals and so forth. So,
we know there's going to be some kind of
ramifications for Live Nation. I think
for average music fans, the big question
of what this case, what this case has
all been about is will this lower ticket
prices? Will this lower fees? Will this
help me when it comes to my wallet? I
think we really don't know that yet. For
the biggest shows, for those Beyoncé
concerts, for Bruce Springsteen, for the
Kendrick Lamar tour,
that's where it really gets into that
supply and demand dynamics. And it
really is about those artists charging
what they think they're worth and what
fans are willing to pay for it. And what
we've seen is that fans will go through
anything to see their favorite artists.
If Beyoncé ticket yesterday, they might
still pay that same $1,000. The question
is who gets it? Does Live Nation get it
or does somebody else have the
opportunity to get that now? But for the
last 16 years, we've been sort of living
in the Live Nation regime where they set
the rules and they have all the power
and prices have gone up, fees have gone
up, buying a ticket has come with a lot
of hassle that really bothers music
fans. I think now there is a chance for
that to change. That if there's more
competition in this business, if Live
Nation isn't the only power in town and
somebody else really can compete against
them, there is the possibility that that
could change.
All of that makes sense. And given all
of that and given the ultimate outcome
of the case that Live Nation was
ultimately declared a monopoly, how
should we be thinking about the
government's earlier decision to settle?
Well, I think there still are a lot of
questions. Why did they settle? Um how
did that happen? I think the states
looked like they carried forward a
winning case after the federal
government bailed on them. There's
already a lot of questions in Congress.
Six Democratic senators sent a letter to
the judge asking for him to scrutinize
this. There is a legal process that
happens when there's an antitrust
settlement that allows the judge to
review the settlement to make sure that
it's in the public interest. It goes
back to a law passed after Watergate.
And that will be happening in this case.
Mhm. One of the biggest questions here
is what happened that led to that
settlement? The lobbying that we were
talking about that happened at the
highest levels of the Trump Justice
Department and may have even included
the White House. Who was involved? Who
was influenced? And was the settlement
made in the public interest? Was it a
fair resolution to the case that does
benefit the public or was there
something corrupt about the way it came
about? That's what those senators were
getting at when they sent the letter to
the judge saying that it looked
suspicious.
>> [music]
>> So, this case that's already a big deal
in the music industry, already a big
deal for regular concert-goers,
>> [music]
>> may wind up having even wider
reverberations in the end.
>> [music]
>> Ben Sisario, thank you so much.
Thanks, Rachel.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
During testimony on Capitol Hill on
Wednesday, Health Secretary Robert F.
Kennedy Jr. said the agency was advising
every child to get the measles, mumps,
and rubella vaccine.
Kennedy's comments were a stark
departure from previous [music]
assertions he's made about vaccines,
including calling vaccination a quote
personal choice when measles broke out
in Texas [music] last year,
and urging parents to quote do their own
research when it came to vaccinating
their newborns.
And [music]
Secretary of the Navy John Faelan was
fired on Wednesday after months of
infighting with senior Pentagon leaders
over how to revive the Navy's struggling
shipbuilding program.
Tensions have been simmering for months
between Faelan and his two bosses,
[music]
Defense Secretary Pete Hegseth and
Deputy Defense Secretary Stephen
Feinberg, over management style, [music]
personnel issues, and other matters.
>> [music]
>> Today's episode was produced by Shannon
Lynn and Diana Winn. It was edited by
Brendan Klinkenberg and Michael Benoist,
and contains music by Marion Lozano, Dan
Powell, [music] and Rowan Nemi Stow. Our
theme music is by Wonderly. This episode
was engineered by Chris Wood.
>> [music]
[music]
>> That's it for The Daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow.